Good day, brothers and sisters.
Our next session will begin with a music video presentation.
This afternoon's music video presentation
shows the joy of our brothers around the earth
as they share in giving a witness.
It also reminds us that we can always rely on Jehovah
for support.
Let's watch and listen.
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
He has taught you the Holy Spirit of God,
and He has told us not to let it go.
Let's watch and listen.
The opening song for this session highlights the importance of including Jehovah in one's marriage.
We invite you to stand and sing song number 131 entitled,
What God has Yoke Together.
Please be seated.
Marriage and family life are not always easy.
The amount of joy you find in your family depends in part on you.
The following four parts symposium will help husbands, wives, parents, and children
to find joy together despite imperfections.
Each speaker will introduce the next.
Brother Seth Hyatt, a helper to the service committee, will present the first talk entitled,
Cultivate joy in your family.
Husbands, rejoice in your wife.
Can you imagine how Adam must have felt when he was introduced to Eve?
Actually, we don't have to imagine how he felt.
We know that he was overwhelmed with appreciation.
And he expressed his appreciation in poetic terms that are recorded in the Bible.
You remember the words,
This is at last, bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh.
Think about it.
Adam and Eve had a perfect marriage.
And together, they formed a perfect family.
Of course, with their disobedience, all of that changed.
Instead of perfection, they were confronted with one another's imperfections.
And in the instant that they separated themselves from Jehovah,
they began to experience stress and anxiety that affected their relationship.
It is a testimony to Jehovah's love and wisdom
despite imperfections and despite the stress and anxiety that have only intensified in these last days.
The family can still be a source of joy, a place of security and stability.
But for that to happen, each member of the family must shoulder his load of scriptural responsibility.
This symposium, we're going to consider husbands, wives, parents and children
and how each of us can contribute to the joy of the family.
To start, let's address husbands.
If you are a husband, how do you view your wife?
Do you view her as Jehovah does?
Do you view her and feel about her as Adam felt about Eve when he first met her?
In fact, the Bible helps us husbands appreciate that our wives are a gift from Jehovah.
Do you appreciate the gift?
And are you demonstrating your appreciation?
For a few minutes this morning, we're going to consider four ways that we husbands can demonstrate appreciation for the gift Jehovah has given us.
If you're taking notes, here they are.
Number one, it's important that we assign our wives on her.
Number two, we must invest time in our relationship.
Number three, it's important that we confine our romantic interests to our wife.
And number four, we have to be realistic in our expectations.
Let's consider these points one at a time.
Turn please in your Bible to first Peter, chapter three.
And we're going to read verse seven.
You husbands, in the same way continued dwelling with them according to knowledge.
Assign them on her as to a weaker vessel, the feminine one,
since they are also errors with you of the undeserved favor of life.
In order for your prayers not to be hindered.
Well, Peter leaves us in no doubt as to who are being addressed.
You husbands, that's you and me.
He tells us that we must continue dwelling with our wives according to knowledge.
The footnote in our Bible says showing them consideration or understanding them.
How well do you know your wife?
What do you know about her background, her upbringing?
You know what makes her happy?
Do you know why?
You know what's upsetting to her?
What causes anxiety?
Do you understand why?
See, it's important that we take the time to get to know our wives.
Because only then can we care for their physical, emotional, and spiritual needs.
And only then can we do what Peter next says in the verse.
And here's our main point.
Assign them on her.
Assign your wife on her.
And then Peter says as to a weaker vessel.
Now, what does Peter mean when he refers to the wife as a weaker vessel?
Do you think he's betraying some chauvinistic leaning?
No, because he's already said, assign her on her.
We could illustrate it this way.
Imagine that you have two bowls, exactly the same sawas, exactly the same capacity.
But one is made of wood, and the other is made of very fine, very expensive porcelain.
Both bowls, both with the same capacity.
But would you handle both in the same way?
No.
See, you recognize that the porcelain is more valuable and more fragile.
So you handle it in a different way.
And that's what Peter is telling us about our wives.
She is the weaker vessel, the feminine one.
In what way is she weaker?
Certainly not intellectually, and certainly not spiritually.
Primarily, in a physical sense, we husbands have an advantage.
So we accord our wife on her.
That means we would never get physical with her.
And certainly we would never, on a pretext, pretend to honor her in public
and then abuse her in some way in private.
See, that would never work, would it?
No, we assign her honor at all times.
And here's why.
Peter says they are also heirs with you of the undeserved favor of life.
Husbands and wives are on equal footing before Jehovah in a spiritual sense.
Both husbands and wives must wash their robes and make them white in the blood of the lamb.
Jesus did not die more for husbands than he did for wives.
And both husbands and wives have the hope of everlasting life.
So we remember that if we don't, how does Peter conclude?
In order for your prayers not to be hindered.
The point, our dealings with our wife will have a direct impact on our personal relationship with Jehovah.
So assign her honor, value what she does for you and for your family and demonstrate your appreciation.
Our second point, invest time in your relationship.
It's so easy, isn't it?
For secular work, theocratic assignments and association with others to rob us a valuable time that should be spent with our wives.
Interestingly, when we were getting to know one another, courting, we were anxious for one-on-one time.
That shouldn't change when we got married.
So buy out the time, set it aside and stick to it.
In that way, you demonstrate your appreciation for the gift Jehovah has given you.
Our third point is highlighted in Proverbs chapter 5.
So turn there with me, please.
Proverbs chapter 5 and we'll begin reading in verse 18.
May your own fountain be blessed.
And here's the point.
And may you rejoice with the wife of your youth.
A loving doe, a graceful mountain goat.
Let her breasts satisfy you at all times.
And then here again is the point.
May you be captivated by her love constantly.
What is the point?
We must confine our romantic interests to our wife.
There's no other option.
We want to rejoice with the wife of our youth.
We want to be captivated by her love.
That means avoiding overly close relationships with other women.
And not just physical relationships, texting, video conferencing,
telephone calls, all constitute a relationship.
So we're very careful we set limits and we don't go beyond them.
And confining our romantic interests to our wife includes rejecting sexual fantasies involving others.
The world makes light of such fantasizing.
But Jesus helped us to appreciate it's a very serious matter.
Do you recall his words in the sermon on the mount?
Anyone who keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery in his heart.
The point fantasizing is little more than rehearsing.
So we reject such fantasies knowing that they violate Bible counsel including Jesus' very pointed advice.
And they can prevent us from rejoicing in our wife.
Finally, number four.
Be realistic in your expectations.
We husbands are not perfect. We know that.
Our wives are not perfect.
Don't you appreciate it when your wife smooths over your imperfection and makes you look good?
Well, our wives appreciate it when we do that for them.
So be alert for opportunities to do that.
In the following dramatization, notice how the husband rejoices in his wife.
I was trying to get caught up on paperwork for the circuit overseas visit.
There was so much to do.
You gotta be kidding me.
Well, you're home early, honey. I said something was wrong.
The kids had left a few things out and I was a bit preoccupied.
The tough day?
You were supposed to talk to the girls about this. They're making it a habit.
The more I thought about it though, I realized it wasn't just a kitchen.
I guess I was part of the problem.
Or maybe the problem was me.
You see, my wife is an amazing woman.
I'm so loving. It would be an understatement to call her industrious.
And then there's her infectious joy.
I mean, how could I not love her?
But sometimes it takes more than saying I love you.
You know, honey, you're right.
This is completely unacceptable.
I'll talk to the girls as soon as they come through that door.
Thank you. I love you.
I love you too.
Did you notice how the husband in the video rejoiced in his wife?
He reflected on her many good works.
Her devotion to Jehovah.
The good act that she performed for others.
Her fine work in behalf of her family.
Her spontaneous joy that made her even more beautiful to him.
And as he reflected on all of those fine things, what happened?
His appreciation for his gift, deepened.
And he was motivated to do something about it.
That's a beautiful example for us.
So, rejoice in your wife by assigning her honor,
by investing time in your relationship,
by confining your romantic interests to your wife,
and by being realistic in your expectations.
If you do, your marriage and your family will continue to be a source of joy,
a place of stability, and a place of security.
Brother Patrick LaFranca, a helper to the personnel committee of the governing body,
will now present the next talk of the symposium.
Cultivate joy in your family.
Wives rejoice in your husband.
Christian Wives, are you happy?
Do you love being a wife?
Well, probably right now you're looking at your husband and saying,
of course, that's good.
But could you add even more joy to your marriage?
You may be thinking, yes, if only my husband would,
and you finish the sentence.
I think most husbands would admit we have some room for improvement,
but this talk is for you.
What can you do as a wife to add joy to your marriage?
Well, one of the first things is to think about your God assigned role.
Open please to Genesis chapter 2 and verse 18.
Now here, Jehovah is going to explain why he was making a wife for Adam.
Then Jehovah God said, it is not good for the man to continue to be alone.
I am going to make a helper for him as a compliment of him.
So Eve was going to be a helper as a compliment of Adam.
What is a compliment?
Well, we feel sure that you sisters know a lot about complementary colors.
When you go to pick out an outfit with accessories,
you pick those with colors that blend well together,
that are harmonious combination, or when you're making a meal.
You know there are certain foods that go well with other foods,
or compliment other foods.
Like a Korean sister making kimchi probably will make rice,
or pasta with cheese, bacon and eggs, bread and butter.
There are so many combinations that compliment one another.
So when Jehovah God created Eve,
he built into her feminine qualities that he knew would really work well
with Adam's masculine qualities.
So Adam and Eve had a prospect of being a perfectly matched couple.
They could work well together.
Eve could be fully happy in working with her husband and caring for that garden,
a beautiful home God-gatherer.
But of course, we know that didn't happen because of sin.
Along with sin came stress.
And here we are, descendants of Adam and Eve.
That's what we've got to, sin and stress.
But Jehovah helps us, doesn't he?
And he gives us principles that can help us make a happy marriage.
Please open to Ecclesiastes.
Now Ecclesiastes chapter four, verse nine and ten,
describe what a partnership should be like.
So wives, do you think of yourself as your husband's partner?
Well, let's read verse nine.
Two are better than one because they have a good reward for their hard work.
So your husband has made a decision.
And maybe you think, hmm, I don't know if that's the best decision.
But you're his partner.
So how will you help him?
Well, you're going to support that decision.
You're going to try to make it work.
And what will be your reward?
Well, first of all, you're going to accomplish so much more working together
than you could individually.
But more than that, you're going to strengthen your friendship,
your partnership with your husband.
Now, verse ten, it adds, for if one of them falls,
the other can help his partner up.
But what will happen to the one who falls with no one to help him up?
You may be thinking, well, my husband's a strong man.
And probably so.
But inside, he may be struggling with serious insecurities.
At times, he may feel like a failure.
Maybe he's lost his job and feels like he's not a good provider.
You're his partner.
What are you going to do to lift him up?
Probably you're going to share with him some tactful words of comfort and encouragement.
That'll be a happy place.
The book of Proverbs contains a much wisdom and some of it is directed to wives.
For example, Proverbs fourteen one.
The truly wise woman builds up her house,
but the foolish one tears it down with her own hands.
So if you are wise, you will build up or increase respect for your husband
on the part of your children and of others.
You don't want to be foolish by speaking negatively,
talking about your husband's deficiencies or failures.
Nor would you want to undermine his own confidence by nagging or arguing with him.
You can do so much to contribute to a happy house.
For example, at mealtimes,
sharing in the conversation, adding perhaps a spiritual gem you found in your Bible reading
or a nice experience or even a humorous story,
something that will lift the spirits of the whole family.
Now, we want to go to Proverbs chapter 31 and probably right away you recognize
this is the chapter that describes a capable wife.
And I think all of you wives want to be that.
You want to be that Proverbs 31 wife.
When you read those verses, you realize this woman is very busy.
She's out there buying household supplies,
caring for the health and the welfare of her family,
helping others in need, spending money wisely,
diligently caring for all the duties of a wife, mother, friend and neighbor.
We think many of you wives are doing all of those things.
And you do it day in and day out and you don't complain and you're happy.
Happy because you're giving.
And then you're even happier when this happens.
In verse 28, her children rise up and declare her happy.
Her husband rises up and praises her.
So they do appreciate what you do.
Sometimes they may not express it, but they do appreciate it.
There is another element to a very happy marriage.
And that's expressed in verse 11.
Her husband trusts her from his heart and he lacks nothing of value.
Trust is so important in a marriage.
A wife must trust her husband and a husband must trust his wife.
You're going to have conversations.
You're going to express your innermost feelings and thoughts.
You must not have fear that they're going to be that's going to be shared with others.
Or you'll be belittled in some way.
Now that's trust, a very important aspect of marriage.
So you wise, build up your friendship, your confidence with your husband.
Now, verse 12, it adds, she rewards him with good, not bad, all the days of her life.
So wives, reward your husband with good, support him in what he has to do.
And we know that he will love you all the more.
It says all the days of your life.
So all the days of your life build up that friendship with your husband.
Whether he is a believer or not.
And we have to say in behalf of the thousands of hardworking elders and ministerial servants,
without your faithful support, it would be much more challenging to care for our responsibilities.
So thank you very much, dear wives, for what you're doing.
Now, sometimes you feel obliged to speak your mind.
And in a trusting relationship, that's expected.
But how will you speak your mind?
Notice verse 26, she opens her mouth and wisdom.
The law of kindness is on her tongue.
So yes, you have something worthwhile to say, but how you say it is very, very important.
Will the law of kindness govern your tongue?
If you say it in kindness, your husband will love you all the more.
Finally, let's read verse 30.
Charm, maybe faults, beauty, maybe fleeting.
But the woman who fears Jehovah will be praised.
See, above all, a capable wife who fears Jehovah is highly valued and is to be praised.
So you, dear wives, who feared Jehovah, you worship him with all and respect.
And that's so important because that helps you to easily be in subjection to your husband
because you know that this pleases your Heavenly Father.
So as you watch the following dramatization, notice how the wife rejoices in her husband.
I was so tired after work, but glad to finally get home until you're going to be kidding me.
You're home, honey.
I knew he had congregation stuff to work on.
But seriously?
You talk to me?
You were supposed to talk to the girls about this.
They're making it a habit.
At first, it upset me he didn't say anything.
But then, I began to think.
It's actually something I've come to love about John.
His patience.
He doesn't overreact.
He's thoughtful, concerned.
He really listens.
It's why he's such a good elder.
We've enjoyed so many blessings together.
Sometimes, I forget.
And I could be more patient.
You know, honey, you're right.
This is completely unacceptable.
I'll talk to the girls as soon as they come through that door.
Thank you.
I love you.
Did you notice how the wife rejoiced in her husband?
Well, when she walked into that kitchen, she saw the mess.
She wasn't rejoicing.
And she wanted to say something to her husband, and she did.
But how did she say it?
Did she yell at him?
No.
She made her point.
How did the husband react?
He didn't overreact.
He let her think about it, and he thought about it.
And as she thought about it, she thought, you know, he didn't overreact.
That's one of the things I love about my husband.
He is so patient.
And then, of course, he talked with her, and they resolved the issue.
So love triumphed over any possible argument or anger.
So continue dear wives.
Relay on Jehovah as you work to make your marriage a delight.
And Jehovah will bless and help you.
Brother Gary Bro, a helper to the service committee,
will now present the next talk of this symposium.
Call of a joy in your family, parents, rejoice in your children.
We're very happy to have hundreds of thousands of children associated with our congregations worldwide.
You can be assured Jehovah loves every one of those children.
Well, how can we say that?
Well, one reason is that every child owes its name to Jehovah God,
because he's the originator of life, and, in fact, the originator of the family unit as well.
When Jesus was in heaven, he recognized and observed Jehovah's intense love for children.
And when Jesus walked the earth, he reflected those same qualities towards children.
The Psalmist beautifully expresses Jehovah's feelings about children in the 127th Psalm in verse 3.
And let's read that.
Psalm 127 and verse 3.
It says, look, sons are an inheritance from Jehovah.
The fruit of the womb is a reward.
So, not only are children a blessing or a reward,
the scripture indicates that they are an inheritance as well.
Yes, they are a gift to you from Jehovah.
A person who hopes to inherit something usually prepares to receive it and then takes good care of it afterwards.
I'm sure that's exactly what you parents want to do with your children.
While children can bring much joy, they can also cause frustration.
So, the question is, how can you find joy in your children despite living in a stressful world?
One suggestion is to view your children the way Jehovah does.
These are special gifts to you from him.
Love them. Make them feel loved.
It's not enough for you to know you love your own children. They need to know it.
They will not know it unless you find ways to show your love to them.
And as with any gift, there's a responsibility to take care of it.
If we go back to the 127 Psalm, notice the illustration that King Solomon uses to explain this responsibility.
It's in verses 4 and 5, Psalm 127, 4 and 5.
It says, like arrows in the hand of a mighty man, soar the sons of one's youth.
Happy is the man who fills his quiver with them. They will not be put to shame.
So children are likened to arrows and parents to mighty warriors.
So a warrior will take the arrow and he will carefully aim it so he hits the target.
What's the same with you parents?
We encourage you carefully direct your children in a way that, so to speak, you hit the target.
So your children can have a happy fulfilling life of serving Jehovah God.
So what can help you to do that?
Pray to Jehovah to help you build and maintain a strong relationship with your children.
This closeness will help them to respond favorably to your good direction.
Yes, the way you treat your children is going to affect not only their future, but your happiness as well.
Now, there are five suggestions that might be of assistance and building and maintaining this strong relationship with your children.
The first one, tell your children you love them.
Or you might say, well, that's not the way I was raised.
Well, maybe not, but learn from the example of Jehovah God because Jehovah openly expressed his affection for his son, Jesus.
And no matter how you were brought up, learn to express openly your feelings towards your children.
One father said this,
I have found that children are a bit like some flowers.
Just as these little plants turn toward the sun to receive light and warmth, children look to their parents for love and for reassurance that they are welcome members of the family.
They don't make your children have to ask you, mom, dad, do you love me?
No, on a regular basis, let your words support the fact that you love them.
Now, another way to build a strong relationship with your children is to give them your time.
That's going to be a challenge in the world we're living in now.
But don't you think your children are worth meeting that challenge?
It's going to require good organization on your part and maybe even making some sacrifices, giving up some things that you enjoy doing.
But spend a lot of time talking to your children, eating with your children, playing with your children.
It's up to you parents to figure out how you can give your time to your children.
A mother once asked her children,
if you could have anything you wanted, what would you like most?
All four responded, more time with mom and dad.
Yes, so show your children how important they are to you by spending time with them.
But you know, there's more than necessary just to physically be around them that leads us to our third suggestion.
Listen to your children and acknowledge their feelings.
So when communicating with your children, don't dominate the conversations.
Let them talk, listen carefully and respectfully.
Try to understand how they feel.
And when they express themselves and their emotions, their thoughts and sometimes and maybe in extreme terms,
well, don't respond in a similar way.
Proverbs 16, 23 says,
The heart of the wise one gives his mouth insight.
So parents, work hard at patiently trying to understand why your child feels the way they do and how you can be of help.
One father expressed the matter this way.
Since Jehovah allows me to pour out my heart to him in prayer,
I think it is only fair that I allow my children to pour out their positive and negative feelings to me.
Also, listen to your children and acknowledge their feelings.
Now, the fourth suggestion that may help to maintain a strong relationship with your children is do not expect them to be adults.
Remember, the Bible says, through use, a person's perceptive powers are trained to distinguish between right and wrong.
Well, that's going to take time.
The Bible also speaks of the trait of the babe, the foolishness of boyhood, and the vanity of adolescence.
So as your children are going through these various stages, recognize their limitations and don't expect them to be little adults.
Now, the fifth suggestion, when disciplining your children, always show love and discernment.
Now, this is supported by Ephesians chapter 6 and verse 4, because there it tells parents not to be irritating your children, but to bring them up in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.
It says, no secret formulas are how to accomplish this, especially since every child is different.
So parents, we encourage you give thought to the manner of your discipline, always showing love and discernment.
So there are five suggestions that will help you to build a strong relationship with your children that will help them to respond to your good training.
Now, what effect will that have upon you parents?
Well, please read with me Proverbs chapter 23 and 24 and 25.
Proverbs 23, 24 and 25.
It says, the father of a righteous one will surely be joyful.
Whoever father is a wise son will rejoice in him. Your father and your mother will rejoice, and she who gave birth to you will be joyful.
So the greatest joy that a parent can have is to see their children turn out to be righteous and wise servants of Jehovah God.
It's going to take time and effort on your part to accomplish that, but we encourage you don't give up on these precious gifts that you have received from Jehovah.
Have you watched the following dramatization? Notice how the parents rejoice in their children.
Thank you. I love you.
I love you too.
Show time.
So the fire drill went off right when we ran out of access to him.
Him, I'm death. Got a shower before us then.
Girls.
Okay.
You need to finish the kitchen now.
No, we don't have any time. We just got home.
Yeah, I think we've been for 15 minutes.
No discussion. No excuses.
Now.
Okay. Thanks.
I did tell them to leave the kitchen spotless, didn't I?
Yeah. They needed to hear that.
True.
It's just overall, they are.
I know. I know.
They were actually pioneering during the circuit overseer's visit.
They really put themselves out for others.
Including you. I mean us.
Ever want to take them for granted?
Girls. I felt the big mess earlier.
Thanks for cleaning that up.
Your mom and I, we were upset.
But we really want you to know that...
You are gifts from Jehovah.
Precious gifts. We both cherish.
We love you very much.
What your mom said.
Did you notice how the parents rejoiced in their children?
Even though the daughters needed some counsel and some discipline,
it didn't overshadow all their good qualities.
No, but these parents made comments like they never wanted to take the girls for granted.
And they cherished these girls.
In fact, they openly expressed that they loved them.
It was apparent this family had cultivated joy.
And we're confident that you as parents also were working hard
at cultivating joy in your family.
The things that will help you is to be sure to tell your children you love them.
Give them your time, listen to them, acknowledge their feelings.
Don't expect them to be adults and train them with love and discernment.
These suggestions are going to help you to aim your children
to an everlasting future of serving Jehovah God.
And as you put forth all this effort to assist your children,
you'll be able to rejoice in them these precious gifts
that you have inherited from Jehovah.
Brother Ronald Kerzan, a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will now present the final talk of this symposium.
Cultivate joy in your family, young ones, rejoice in your parents.
This symposium has helped us to appreciate even more Jehovah's love for families.
And we appreciate this gift, the Bible,
which could serve as a blueprint for families to have a loving, warm, safe environment.
And you, young ones, you play a vital role in contributing to the joy in your family life.
Your mother, your father, they love you very much.
And they want to have a close, personal, loving relationship with you.
And it's their heartfelt desire that you have a close, personal, loving relationship
with your Heavenly Father, Jehovah.
They want you to be happy now and for the rest of your life, everlasting life.
In the previous talk, we understood how Jehovah wants parents to train their children.
But with what purpose?
Notice what Proverbs chapter 22 and verse 6 gives us instructions for parents.
They're in verse 6, it reads,
train a boy, or the footnote says, child or youth, in the way he should go.
Even when he grows old, he will not depart from it.
So what is Jehovah asking of your parents?
To train you.
To train you in such a way that you will always serve Jehovah from your youth all the way to your adulthood.
And really, for the rest of your life.
So Jehovah doesn't spell out every single detail for parents on how they should instruct you and how they should train you.
That's left up to them.
And so they need to prayerfully think about what would be best for your family and for you as a child.
Personally.
This means that they will make house rules.
Sometimes you'll get chores, maybe curfews.
You will get reminders, correction and discipline.
Why?
Because they love you.
And because they're doing their best to listen and obey Jehovah.
And his instructions are to train you, discipline you, so you can serve Jehovah forever.
It's not an easy assignment.
They need all the help that they can get from Jehovah as well as from you.
Especially when they make rules that you may not like.
What you can and cannot wear.
What you can and cannot listen to or watch.
Or who you pick as close friends.
These are decisions that are left to your parents.
Now will your parents always make the perfect decision, the perfect rule?
No.
Breaking news.
It's not news to you that they will make mistakes.
They're imperfect.
But they love you and they're doing the best they can to give you the best training possible.
So you can love Jehovah and serve him forever.
We know that you love and appreciate all that your parents do for you.
But let's be real.
Sometimes you don't understand the reason for the rule.
Or you simply don't agree with it.
What do you do?
Well, you get frustrated.
But that's okay.
We've been there.
We were your age at one time and we completely understand that it could be frustrating.
But we know that this will pass because you'll understand why they're doing this.
It's out of love.
So when you don't see eye to eye, what are you supposed to do?
Sometimes you need to change your view.
A much has to do with how you view your parents.
How you view your mother and your father will affect how much or how little you respect them.
Listen to them and obey them.
And here's a question we'd like to pose to you children.
Do you sometimes view your parents as prison guards or lifeguards?
Interesting question.
Prison guards are trained to keep a close watch over prisoners because they don't really trust them.
They keep them confined with many restrictions.
They tell them what to do and when to do it.
When to get up and when to go to sleep.
What they will eat and when they will eat.
What they will wear and all kinds of other rules.
They keep all these restrictions because they don't trust them.
Do you view your parents as prison guards at times?
Well, you might, especially if you want more freedom, more independence.
And if it seems like they don't really trust you, they're watching every single move that you make.
You might feel confined because of all the rules and restrictions.
What about lifeguards?
Well, lifeguards also watch people.
They watch swimmers but for a very different reason.
They want to keep them safe.
They want to make sure that they do not swim into danger.
So from their lifeguard tower, they keep a close watch over all the swimmers.
Sometimes they will use their whistle to warn you of danger.
To keep away from riptides or maybe sharks, things that you're not aware of.
Do you view your parents as lifeguards?
We hope so because they are.
It's been said that you could spend years wishing your parents would get off your back
only to realize that they're the only ones who ever really had your back.
Yes, your parents like lifeguards are looking out for your best interest.
They've always had your back and they always will.
They want to make sure that you avoid being drawn into the dangerous currents in this wicked world.
Dangerous that you may not be aware of.
Do you want to be happier?
Do you want to have more trust from your parents?
More freedom, more independence?
If so, you might have to change your view of your parents.
And don't view them in a negative way like their prison guards,
but view them like lifeguards, safe guarding your life.
Your parents love you very much and their training will pay off if you listen.
And that's what Jehovah is asking you to do.
While your parents are training you, you need to do your part and that is listen.
And that's what our scripture at Proverbs chapter 23 has for an assignment for you.
That's chapter 23 of Proverbs in verse 22.
And their verse 22 says to your children, listen to your father who caused your birth
and do not despise or dislike your mother just because she has grown old.
So, although it's not easy at times, what is Jehovah asking of you?
As your parents are training you, please listen to them.
But what does it mean to listen?
Listen is more than just hearing words.
It's hearing with a view to obey.
Listening to your mother and your father means giving them your full attention,
divided attention.
It means turning off your music, taking out your earbuds,
putting away your phone and avoiding rolling your eyes when they're speaking to you.
At times you may get frustrated, you may get upset.
That's understandable. We all do.
But how you control your emotions will affect the outcome in the future.
By listening and obeying your parents, you are building a record of trust
that will help you in the future when you need to communicate with them.
Maybe about rules.
Remember, trust is something that you earn.
It's not something that you demand or that's automatic.
What is the best way for you to speak to your parents about rules that you don't understand
or maybe that you don't agree with?
You need to communicate.
Good, open communication.
Communication doesn't mean complaining, shouting, whining.
Maybe replying with sarcasm.
It means calmly.
Tell your parents how you feel.
Tell them what's on your mind.
The following Bible verse helps if we can apply it.
Verse 29-11 says, a stupid person gives vent to all his feelings.
It's out of control. No control.
But the wise one calmly keeps them in check.
In control.
That's what we want to try to follow.
A young woman named Devon tried to do this and this is what she advises.
She says, I found that when I stayed calm and presented my thoughts clearly,
I could counter my parents to listen and either to reason with me on their decision
or to come up with another solution.
Parents appreciate having a real conversation with their children
rather than screaming matches that end up with slamming doors.
Open communication is what's needed.
So you, young ones, what have we learned?
We have learned how to view our parents correctly.
Not as a prison guard, but as a lifeguard who really wants to save your life.
You're everlasting life.
They have your back and they always will.
Listening and obeying strengthens your relationship with your parents
as well as your Heavenly Father, Jehovah.
It brings you joy and brings joy to your parents.
And as you apply the training that your parents are giving to you,
you will gain wisdom that will help you now to make wise decisions
so that you can have their real life.
Yes, everlasting life.
As you watch the concluding video of this symposium,
please notice how these children find joy in their parents.
Man, I'm so happy today because that fighter interrupted our mantis
but we have to do it tomorrow.
Hey, Mom's dad got a shower before our study.
No discussion, no excuses, now.
Okay.
Where did all of this come from?
We're going to be here all night.
It did give us time to think.
They are such good examples.
Mom never stops working.
And our home is always, always beautiful.
They give us so much of their time and themselves.
A bit cheesy sometimes, but overall, they're pretty great.
That night, they didn't lecture us.
They just reminded us of one thing and it was pretty deep.
When we dedicate our lives to Jehovah, our lives includes everything.
Our time, our resources, our home, our kitchen.
Yes, our kitchen.
And how we care for those things, it reflects on him.
And on us as your parents.
That kind of sank in.
I knew I could do better.
No, Mom, we got this.
Um, we got this?
Oh, yeah, we got this.
Did you notice how the daughters showed respect for their parents?
They did this by listening and obeying their instructions.
What was the key?
It's how they viewed their parents.
They reflected on their parents' fine example in the ministry at home
when they would take the time and have the patience to help them,
to listen to them.
And they saw the joy on their mother's face as she kept the home clean and tidy.
What a good example.
They listened to their parents' advice and then they made personal application.
They learned that showing respect into family meant helping out with chores,
even when it meant doing the dishes.
This made their parents happy and the daughters happy as well.
In this symposium, we considered how husbands and wives, mothers and fathers,
and children can all add and contribute to the success of the joy within the family.
They do this by working together in unity, focusing on the positive things in others
and having respect for one another.
Yes, each and the family, if they apply Bible principles, use Jehovah's Blueprint.
They know that they can have a successful and happy family.
And most of all, we can make Jehovah happy.
Give him honor as the designer, the architect, and the creator of all families.
Thank you, brothers, for sharing that practical counsel.
May all family members continue to strengthen their love and appreciation for one another.
We now invite you to stand and sing song number 135, entitled,
Jehovah's Warm Appeal, Be Wise My Son.
After the song, there will be some announcements.
And if you wish, you may remain standing.
Again, that song number 135.